Compare three remaining options (draft) (#496)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: exploration/syntax-exploration-2.md

### Candidate 1a

**Description:** Invert for Text Mode, distinguish statements from placeholders

- Placeholders and expressions use `{`/`}`:
  > `{$var}`, `{unquoted}`, `{|quoted|}`, `{$var :function}`
- Non-placeholders use `{#`/`}`:
  > `{#input $user}`, `{#local $var=$foo :expr}`, `{#match {$foo}}`, `{#when * *}`

The use of `#` as the sigil is intentional here.
This sigil might be replaced, but does not require additional escaping, as code is enclosed in `{`/`}`.
Note that the `#` sigil might also be considered to be part of the keyword, e.g. `#when`, `#local` vs.
allowing whitespace to appear between them.

Patterns in this syntax are generally unquoted,
but MAY be quoted with the 2023-10-09 consensus `{{`/`}}` quotes.

ASCII whitespace trimming is assumed, but is a hot topic.

**Examples**
```
Hello world!
```
```
Hello {$user}
```
```
{#input $user :person type=informal}
Hello {$user}

{#input $user :person type=informal}Hello {$user}
```
```
{#input $var :function option=value}
{#local $foo = $bar :function option=value}
Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}

{#input $var :function option=value}{#local $foo = $bar :function option=value}Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}
```
```

> {#match {$foo} {$bar}}
> {#when foo bar} Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
> {#when * *} {$foo} hello you have a {$var}
> 
> {#match {$foo} {$bar}}{#when foo bar}Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}{#when * *}{$foo} hello you have a {$var}

Reviewer: It would be better to show here the one-selector case, as that's much more common.

```suggestion
{#match {$foo}}
{#when foo} Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
{#when *} {$foo} hello you have a {$var}

{#match {$foo}}{#when foo}Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}{#when *}{$foo} hello you have a {$var}
```

```
```
{#match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}}
{#when a b} {{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}
{#when x y} {{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}
{#when * *} {|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}

> {#match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}}{#when a b} {{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}{#when x y} {{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}{#when * *} {|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{#match {$foo :function option=value}{$bar :function option=value}}{#when a b}{{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}{#when x y}{{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}{#when * *}{|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}
```

- "Simple" messages (lacking declarations or selectors) are unquoted patterns.
- Patterns with declarations (`input`, `local`), selectors (`match`/`when`) or both quote all patterns.
- Pattern whitespace is always significant.
  Note that "pattern whitespace" is only that whitespace that appears inside the quoting `{`/`}`
  for quoted patterns.

> The use in the previous iteration of `{{` and `}}` surrounding code-mode messages was identified as a potential negative, 
> as the closing `}}` are superfluous to the message.

The use of `>>` to represent the "starting code-mode sigil" is **_not_** final.
**_Do not fixate on the specific character sequence when choosing (or not) this design._**

**Examples**
```
Hello world!
```
```
Hello {$user}
```
```
>>input {$user :function option=value}
{Hello {$user}}

>>input {$user :function option=value}{Hello {$user}}
```
```
>>input {$var :function option=value}
local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}
{Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}}

>>input {$var :function option=value}local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}{Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}}
```
```

> >>match {$foo} {$bar}
> when foo bar {Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}}
> when * * {{$foo} hello you have a {$var}}
> 
> >>match {$foo}{$bar}when foo bar {Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}}when * * {{$foo} hello you have a {$var}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>match {$foo}
when foo {Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}}
when * {{$foo} hello you have a {$var}}

>>match {$foo}when foo{Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}}when *{{$foo} hello you have a {$var}}
```

```

```
>>match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}
when a b {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }
when x y {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }
when * * {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }

> >>match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}when a b {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }when x y {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }when * * {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>match {$foo :function option=value}{$bar :function option=value}when a b{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }when x y{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }when * *{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }
```

```

### Candidate 3a

**Description:** Use sigils for code mode, use `{`/`}` for keys

- Starts in text mode. 
- Uses a sigil for code statements. 
  - Requires the code-mode sigil to be escaped in **_unquoted_** patterns.
  - Quoted patterns do not require this sigil to be escaped.
  - Note that decisions about auto-trimming affect the escaping situation. 
    If quoting the pattern is required, no additional escapes are needed.
- Placeholders and expressions use `{`/`}`:
  > `{$var}`, `{unquoted}`, `{|quoted|}`, `{$var :function}`

> The use of `~` as the sigil is **_not_** an inherent part of the design here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The use of `%` as the sigil is **_not_** an inherent part of the design here.
```

The actual sigil or sigil sequence needs to be decided. 
Note that using a doubled-sigil reduces the need for escaping.

Patterns in this syntax are generally unquoted,
but MAY be quoted with the 2023-10-09 consensus `{{`/`}}` quotes.

Patterns lacking declarations, selectors, or both, are **_not_** auto-trimmed.
Whitespace in quoted patterns is significant.
Whitespace in unquoted patterns may or may not be significant (hot topic).

```
Hello world!
```
```
Hello {$user}!
```
```

> ~input {$var :function option=value}
> Hello {$var}
> 
> ~input {$var :function option=value}Hello {$var}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
%input {$var :function option=value}
Hello {$var}

%input {$var :function option=value}Hello {$var}
```

```
```

> ~input {$var :function option=value}
> ~local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}
> Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}
> 
> ~input {$var :function option=value}~local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
%input {$var :function option=value}
%local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}
Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}

%input {$var :function option=value}%local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}
```

```
```

> ~match {$foo} {$bar}
> ~when{foo bar} Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
> ~when{  *   *} {$foo} hello you have a {$var}
> 
> ~match {$foo}{$bar}~when{foo bar} Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}~when{* *} {$foo} hello you have a {$var}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
%match {$foo}
%when{foo} Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
%when{*} {$foo} hello you have a {$var}

%match {$foo}%when{foo}Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}%when{*}{$foo} hello you have a {$var}
```

```

```

> ~match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}
> ~when {a b} {{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}
> ~when {x y} {||}  {$foo} is {$bar}  {||}
> ~when {* *} {|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}
> 
> ~match {$foo :function option=value}{$bar :function option=value}~when {a b}{{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}~when {x y} {||}{$foo} is {$bar}  {||}~when {* *}{|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
%match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}
%when {a b} {{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}
%when {x y} {||}  {$foo} is {$bar}  {||}
%when {* *} {|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}

%match {$foo :function option=value}{$bar :function option=value}%when {a b}{{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}%when {x y} {||}{$foo} is {$bar}  {||}%when {* *}{|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}
```

  - Note that decisions about auto-trimming affect the escaping situation. 
    If quoting the pattern is required, no additional escapes are needed.
- Placeholders and expressions use `{`/`}`:
  > `{$var}`, `{unquoted}`, `{|quoted|}`, `{$var :function}`

The use of `%` as the sigil is **_not_** an inherent part of the design here.
The actual sigil or sigil sequence needs to be decided. 
Note that using a doubled-sigil reduces the need for escaping.

Patterns in this syntax are generally unquoted,
but MAY be quoted with the 2023-10-09 consensus `{{`/`}}` quotes.

Patterns lacking declarations, selectors, or both, are **_not_** auto-trimmed.
Whitespace in quoted patterns is significant.
Whitespace in unquoted patterns may or may not be significant (hot topic).

```
Hello world!
```
```
Hello {$user}!
```
```
%input {$var :function option=value}
Hello {$var}

%input {$var :function option=value}Hello {$var}
```
```
%input {$var :function option=value}
%local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}
Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}

%input {$var :function option=value}%local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}
```
```
%match {$foo}

> %when{foo} Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
> %when{*} {$foo} hello you have a {$var}

Reviewer 2: Could we consider using square brackets here, to make this proposal less-curly-heavy?

Something like:

```suggestion
%when [foo] Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
%when [*] {$foo} hello you have a {$var}
```

> %when{foo} Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
> %when{*} {$foo} hello you have a {$var}

Reviewer 2: Or even:

```suggestion
%[when foo] Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
%[when *] {$foo} hello you have a {$var}
```

This would make `%` safe to use again, and only require escaping `%[`.

%when {* *} {|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}

%match {$foo :function option=value}{$bar :function option=value}%when {a b}{{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}%when {x y} {||}{$foo} is {$bar}  {||}%when {* *}{|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}
```

## Whitespace and Pattern Boundaries

One key consideration for the above options is distinguishing the boundary between 
the end of a _pattern_ and the start of a _variant_ (`when` clause).
This was not an issue in the code-mode syntax because the patterns were always delimited ("quoted").

> [*Note]
> This type of syntax is only needed if patterns are not quoted.
> The "hot debate" in our 2023-10-16 teleconference was between "WYSIWYG"
> no-whitespace-trimming supporters and current WG consensus.
> For current consensus and discussion of whitespace design see [here](pattern-exterior-whitespace.md)

- Candidate 1a uses a double sigil `{#` or distinguishing sequence `{#when` to accomplish this.
- Candidate 2a quotes all patterns in code-mode.
- Candidate 3a uses a sigil-keyword sequence `%when` that required at least some additional escaping.

It is reasonable to think that we might modify this particular part of the syntax

> to improve usability. **_Keep in mind the need for single-line authoring._**

Reviewer 3: Do "single-line authoring" mean that:
- you must be able to express any possible functionality on a single line
or
- Carriage Returns are irrelevant. Any MF2.0 string must render the same if all CRs are removed.
or
- something else?

Author: It's the former. Single-line authoring means that syntactically-allowed-but-not-required whitespace is removed. It is shorthand for: many people will author messages in a resource format in which the _message_ is a string with file-local escaping. Think about that in addition to the pretty formatting we use in examples like this:

```
{input $var :function opt=val}
{%match {$foo}}
{%when foo}
    You have {$foo}
{$when *}
    You have really {$foo}
```

That might be single line as:

```
myMessage = "{input $var :function opt=val}{%match {$foo}}{%when foo}You have {$foo}{$when *}You have really {$foo}"
```

(Note that I have trimmed whitespace off of the pattern in the single-line example.)

# Syntax Exploration v2

In the 2023-10-16 teleconference, we narrowed the options being considered for text-mode syntax to "1a", "2a", and "3a". 
Each of these syntax candidates has been adjusted based on our conversation.

One open issue, separately considered here, is the use of an additional sigil for some of the syntaxes.
We have generally used `#` as the placeholder for this sigil in the previous iteration.

## Comparison Matrix

> | Option | Description                                                    | Doesn’t Nest {} | Doesn’t Need More Escapes | Doesn’t Require Quoted Pattern |  Counted {} works | Multiple Expression Syntaxes |
> | :----- | :------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------- | :------------------------ | :----------------------------- |  :--------------- | :------------ |
> | 1a     | Invert for text mode, distinguish statements from placeholders | -               | +                         | +                              | +                | - |
> | 2a     | Text first, current syntax for complex messages                | -               | +                         | -                              | -                | + |
> | 3a     | Use sigils for code mode                                       | +               | -                         | +                              | +                | + |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| Option | Description                                                    | Doesn’t Nest {} | Doesn’t Need More Escapes | Doesn’t Require Quoted Pattern |  Counted {} works | Multiple Expression Syntaxes | Amt of Complexity Added | Legibility of single-line
| :----- | :------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------- | :------------------------ | :----------------------------- |  :--------------- | :------------ | :-------------- |  :--------------
| 1a     | Invert for text mode, distinguish statements from placeholders | -               | +                         | +                              | +                | - |            | - |            | - |
| 2a     | Text first, current syntax for complex messages                | -               | +                         | -                              | -                | + |            | + |            | + |
| 3a     | Use sigils for code mode                                       | +               | -                         | +                              | +                | + |            | - |            | - |
```

Author: @echeran The table was meant to include mainly objective differences between the candidates. I think "complexity added" and "legibility of single-line" are somewhat subjective. Do you agree?

The one part of this table that should probably change in that light is "doesn't require quoted pattern" should probably be "allows unquoted pattern" and I will make that change in a second. There are strong arguments for why quoted-pattern _is a feature_ and not something to avoid, which I expect proponents of `2a` will include in their thinking for why they like that candidate.

```
```
{#match {$foo}}
{#when foo} Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}
{#when *} {$foo} hello you have a {$var}

{#match {$foo}}{#when foo}Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}{#when *}{$foo} hello you have a {$var}
```
```
{#match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}}
{#when a b} {{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}
{#when x y} {{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}
{#when * *} {|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}

{#match {$foo :function option=value}{$bar :function option=value}}{#when a b}{{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}{#when x y}{{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }}{#when * *}{|  |}{$foo} is {$bar}{|  |}
```

### Candidate 2a

**Description**: Text First, Current Syntax for "Complex" Messages

Starts in text mode, but switches to the current "code-mode" syntax for any message containing declarations or selectors.

- "Simple" messages (lacking declarations or selectors) are unquoted patterns.
- Patterns with declarations (`input`, `local`), selectors (`match`/`when`) or both quote all patterns.
- Pattern whitespace is always significant.
  Note that "pattern whitespace" is only that whitespace that appears inside the quoting `{`/`}`
  for quoted patterns.

> > The use in the previous iteration of `{{` and `}}` surrounding code-mode messages was identified as a potential negative, 
> > as the closing `}}` are superfluous to the message.
> 
> The use of `>>` to represent the "starting code-mode sigil" is **_not_** final.
> **_Do not fixate on the specific character sequence when choosing (or not) this design._**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The use of `{# ... #}` to represent the starting and ending code-mode sigils is **_not_** final.
**_Do not fixate on the specific character sequence when choosing (or not) this design._**
```

@mihnita or anyone else: Thoughts? I'm not particular about which delimiter, but using double curlies was too curly and too many for folks. Something to break up the visual monotony would be good, hence the `#` on the inside.

FYI, whatever we decide here should be reflected in the examples below, too.

Reviewer 5: I actually like the opening delimiter only solution. I think it adds more clarity and less complexity:
- No need to balance the delimiter 'at a distance'
- You could only use it at the very start of a message, there should be nothing before this delimiter, except maybe insignificant white space.
- After entering code-mode, you can not get out of it. The closing delimiter thus would be somewhat redundant.

**Examples**
```
Hello world!
```
```
Hello {$user}
```
```

> >>input {$user :function option=value}
> {Hello {$user}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{#
input {$user :function option=value}
{Hello {$user}}
#}
```

> >>input {$user :function option=value}{Hello {$user}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{#input {$user :function option=value}{Hello {$user}}#}
```

```
```

> >>input {$var :function option=value}
> local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}
> {Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{#
input {$var :function option=value}
local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}
{Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}}
#}
```

> >>input {$var :function option=value}local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}{Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{#input {$var :function option=value}local $foo = {$bar :function option=value}{Hello {$var}, you have a {$foo}}#}
```

```
```

> >>match {$foo}
> when foo {Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}}
> when * {{$foo} hello you have a {$var}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{#
match {$foo}
when foo {Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}}
when * {{$foo} hello you have a {$var}}
#}
```

> >>match {$foo}when foo{Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}}when *{{$foo} hello you have a {$var}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{#match {$foo}when foo{Hello {$foo} you have a {$var}}when *{{$foo} hello you have a {$var}}#}
```

```

```

> >>match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}
> when a b {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }
> when x y {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }
> when * * {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{#
match {$foo :function option=value} {$bar :function option=value}
when a b {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }
when x y {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }
when * * {  {$foo} is {$bar}  }
#}
```

> >>match {$foo :function option=value}{$bar :function option=value}when a b{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }when x y{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }when * *{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{#match {$foo :function option=value}{$bar :function option=value}when a b{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }when x y{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }when * *{  {$foo} is {$bar}  }#}
```

|---|---|---|
| `!` |  | Means "not" in most programming languages. |
| `@` | Feels like code? | Means "address" in a lot of contexts. Might be used for annotations |
| `#` | Feels like code. Similar to `#define`. | Common in real text. Used for _everything_, in particular comments. |
| `%` | Feels like code. Used by some templating languages. | Common in real text. |
| `^` |  | Uncommon choice. Harder to see. |
| `&` |  | Used in a lot of escapes, notably HTML. |
| `+` |  | Looks like an operator. |
| `_` | Feels like code. | Looks like a name prefix. Hard to see. |
| `\|` |  | Already used in our syntax for a diff purpose. Weird. |

> | `\` | Feels like code. Already escaped in patterns. | May beed doubling in a resource format. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `\` | Feels like code. Already escaped in patterns. | May require escaping (doubling) in host formats. |
